Scott Taylor was living a quiet life as a husband,
father, and furniture maker, when he had a strange
visit from a man wearing a turban.
The stranger gave him a scroll containing a tale from
the world of Dolphins and Whales.
Scott's life changed dramatically as he begin to follow
the thread of this tale deep into the real world of our
magnificent citation brothers and sisters
whom he calls the citizens of the sea.
(soft music)
You were in the middle of a different kind of
life entirely, something a little bit more main stream
and an event or two occurred that took you down
full on down this path into the study and research
of dolphins and whales.
What is it that inspired you to take this entirely
different direction in life?
Well, I feel like some destiny
was in motion, and like you say
I was living an ordinary life in the middle of a
business and raising a family and,
having an average American life I suppose.
Although I don't really call myself very average.
And one day I got a call from someone who I didn't know
who wanted to stop by my house in the evening and
tell me about a story.
So I invited him to come to the house, and
pretty well forgot about the invitation.
And that evening he arrived at the door and much to
my amazement he was a man standing at the door with
a turban on his head and these brilliant sparkling eyes
and he told me that he something called the
legend of the Golden Dolphin he wanted to share with me.
Well it's a long story how that then developed into
the life that I'm living now, but
I'm sufficed to say it was as if,
the legend of the Golden Dolphin seamed to kind of
connect the dots in my head.
All these different experiences that I had,
thoughts that I had had, areas that I've been
fascinated by that seemed somehow disconnected.
When the legend came along it all connected into one,
sort of seamless picture.
And it also was full of places that I could spend my
own time doing my own research to validate what was there.
So, the story very simply is that this, the
legend of the Golden Dolphin pro-ports to tell the
true relationship between human beings and
whales and dolphins throughout history.
And even from before the time of this planet and
on into the future.
It's a living story, it's not a dead artifact.
It's something which is constantly unfolding.
In fact the very fact that I'm sitting here today is
part of that legend.
And this document that we're putting together right
at this moment is now being woven into the legend itself.
It seems that is very timely that this has
occurred, as if you go to any -- shop
pretty much anywhere in the world you'll see little
dolphins, dolphin tails, blown glass with
dolphins, etcetera.
We do as human beings seem to have a very deep
curiosity about and almost a mystical kind of
respect for dolphins and sounds like there's very
good reason for that.
Well there is and it's that very thing that I have
found central to my research, to my investigation.
When you think about it, what other creature on this
earth do we have that kind of fascination with
and I mean universally?
Cultures around the world have fascinations with
the dolphin.
I've found that in the indigenous stories of people
around the world, there are endless stories about
dolphins, about whales, about how they've
somehow touched those tribes and touched the
stories that they hold.
The scientific community has enormous research going on
today much more now then ever before, into the
nature of these creatures.
And maybe even more we can look at this extraordinary
fact that over a billion dollars a year right now is being
spent on whale watching.
What other creature do we give that kind of attention to?
There is a sensation that comes upon people when they
see a dolphin or when they see a whale.
If you're out on a whale watching trip and you're
with a group of people, many whom you don't know;
you're standing on the deck and the first whale appears.
That whale comes leaping up out of the sea or
something comes up mysteriously right up there next to
the boat, breathes next to you.
There's this thrill of energy that goes through everyone
and that to me is the fascinating thing.
What is that sense that we all get from that?
Why after that first whale appears does everyone
suddenly become everyone else's friend?
Very true and, with 71 percent of the earth
covered in water, these are the citizens
of the sea that seem to command our
greatest respect as well.
Can you talk a little bit, let's go to the science
behind that a little bit.
Just the dolphins, why don't we stick with dolphins for the
moment even though whales are implicitly included
in this, just because some of the research that's
going on right now.
Let's talk about the brain of the dolphin in terms of
the size of the brain, the way their brain functions,
the way that their sonar functions and such.
The dolphins' brain has been very carefully examined
for a long time because it is so unique.
The dolphin's brain, when examined microscopically
has the same density of neurons that the
human brain has.
It's organization seems to be even better organized
in terms of the very aspects of the brain than the
human brain, particularly for its own uses of course.
The dolphin brain, the average dolphin brain is about
40 percent larger than a human brain.
It has certain aspects that we don't have.
Such as?
Well there's a cortex within the dolphin's brain
that we simply have not yet developed.
So it is considered by evolutionary biologists who
being more advanced evolutionary organ than the
human brain.
And what is it responsible for, what way?
How does that brain function?
Well we don't know
and I think that's an interesting point that we don't
quite have the brain capacity to know what that
extra section of their brain is about.
We can, I think some assumptions might be
alright here and that is that, this allows them to create
kinds of associations that are a little bit beyond
what we make.
They live in such an extraordinary environment,
very different then ours.
You could say that their evolution has been similar
to ours and yet on a parallel path.
They are very different than we are
in many, many regards even though we share
the basic fundaments of mammal biology
because of the long evolutionary track that they've
been on and we've been on separately, and the
different environment in which we live, this is
of course affected that.
The dolphin brain is something which is completely
under the control of the dolphin, and that's one of
the great differences.
Does that, as opposed to humans?
Yes.
Tell us the difference.
Well, the very simple way to understand this is that
a dolphin, to be able to sleep, cannot simply fall
totally asleep as we do.
They are what's called conscious breathers.
So every breath that we take, unless we pay attention
to it, is an unconscious act.
This is one of the spiritual practices that people
do is to pay attention to their breath.
A dolphin is a conscious breather which means every
breath is a conscious act.
They're constantly having to calculate the distant
between where they are and the surface of the sea
because they don't breathe the environment in
which they are.
They have to rise to another level and enter that
other level and expel their exhausted air and
draw in new air.
So this conscious process means that, for them to
go asleep, to go fully unconscious as we do would be
impossible, it would be dangerous.
They would simply go below the water, and they would
either run out of air, or they would breathe water and die.
So what they do is they put half of their brain to sleep.
They have conscious control of the use of their brain
so they can put have of it to sleep and use the other
half to stay half awake, able then to breathe
to rise to the surface and to continue swimming
with their friends.
When they've done that for 20 to 40 minutes,
they can awaken the side that was asleep and put
to sleep the side that was awake and continue on
for another 20 to 40 minutes.
And so the average dolphins' sleep, in any
24 hour period amounts to about an hour or an
hour and a half, total.
That's amazing considering the amount of
energy they put out during the day to navigate their
way, play and eat and...
They say that when a baby dolphin is born it has
to be able to swim along with the pod,
the average distance that a pod swims in a day.
And that may be from 10 to 40 miles in one day.
So yes they expend an enormous amount of energy
but they're so efficient in their movement
that we still consider this to be one of the great
paradoxes of physics of how a dolphin can move
as efficiently as it does.
An area that is intriguing to me when it
comes to dolphins and we'll get into the intuitive
abilities of dolphins as well;
is there seems to be a certain type of
behavior that would be considered honorable
and magnanimous even beyond that of human functioning.
Can you speak to that subject just a little bit by
way of either stories that have been perpetuated
or personal observation?
Well you could easily look into a dictionary under
the term altruism and find the picture of a dolphin.
Their care for one another and that care also extends
to human beings is the stuff of legends.
As far back as you go you can find stories among people
talking about having been rescued by dolphins.
One of the more recent historic events that probably
all of your viewers would be familiar with, is the
story of Elián González, the young Cuban boy who
on an attempt to escape with his family from Cuba,
the boat sank and he was alone, left alone
floating in an inner tube in the ocean.
He floated there for several days before he was finally
found and rescued.
And then of course we know what came from that.
When therapists in America were working with him
and asking him to draw his experience, trying to
help him process the horrors of this time, he kept
drawing a picture of himself with a circle around his
body and fins in the water, and they would say well
what is that?
And he said that was the dolphins.
And they kept asking him and finally he told the story
that he had seen sharks come and the sharks had
in fact eaten one of the bodies of the family
that he had been with and he was of course
terrified of this; but before the sharks could
get to him, the dolphins came and begin swimming
circles around him and protecting him.
Now this is a story, most likely, this boy
had never heard a story like that before and he told this
as part of a healing process for himself.
They have very, very little reason to disbelieve this
story and this is just one...
And this is just one of many, yes.
One of hundreds of stories.
What I have seen, not only in my interactions with dolphins
where I see them treating me in a very gentle and kindly
and very tinder fashion, when I may not be feeling
particularly energetic.
I've taken people to swim with dolphins in the ocean,
we've gotten in the ocean and a lot of people were
feeling very energetic and, maybe my stomachs a
little upset and I'm not really feeling I wanna be
in the water right now but I have an obligation to
be there, the dolphins treat me very gently and tenderly.
And that same dolphin within a moment can turn around
and go to the next person who's wanted to do the most
athletic of things and suddenly that dolphin,
it matches their energy and does what that person
would like to do.
So their sensitivity to who we are and the condition
that we're in is extraordinary.
What about stories of actually
healing, working with the healing of humans
and their intuitive abilities in this area to
determine where a problem might exist in a body?
I heard you speak about one that was persistently
touching, poking at a person until there was a bruise
in the area and maybe you can continue that story
and any others, is they're inspirational.
That has happened many times in dolphin
swim facilities where a dolphin will make some kind of
physical contact with a person and either that person
will feel a twinge in their body, something that they've
never felt before.
Or sometimes the dolphin will even go so far as to tap
rather abruptly on a person's body and they can even
wind up with a bruise, and that person then
going to a doctor to say well why am I feeling so
sensitive here?
The doctor examines them and discovers that the
person has a tumor, or some sort of an
ailment that they didn't know anything about.
It's also very common in dolphin swim facilities for
women to discover for the first time that they're pregnant.
The way this is done by the dolphin, because of the
environment in which they live they must have the
ability to detect in great detail the nature of
everything around them.
So in addition to the kind of squeaking and clicking
sounds that we're familiar with they're making
from shows like Flipper and various documentaries
you've seen, the dolphins also have an ultrasonic ability.
Just like the ultrasonic imaging that is used in hospitals
to give a living picture of a fetus within a pregnant woman.
Dolphins also have an ability, identical to that
and probably much more accurate than that.
So a dolphin can then actually look inside your body.
It can see with its, shall we say X-ray vision,
it can see the speed at which your heart is beating,
it can see how full your lungs are, it can see
what you had for lunch, it can see the condition
of your endocrine system.
If your body is suddenly pumping with adrenaline it
can see that starting to happen.
So a dolphin has a way of understanding us that is
really beyond our natural abilities to
understand each other.
We have technology that now enables us to do that.
But what a difference it would make for,
for you and me sitting here if we could literally look
inside each other to see what the condition of
each other was.
So you could say that the dolphin has little ability to
to lie.
To make up a falsehood and try to project that falsehood
because ultimately that's going to be seen through.
How do they actually use their abilities to
say affect healing in another person?
What's going on there as you said a moment ago
when people feel a little twinge or, and so forth?
Well this ultrasound that they emit,
we've measured and found that they can emit almost
five times as much power as we use in hospitals
to shatter kidney stones.
It's extremely powerful.
Now this might be kind of a scary thought,
if it weren't for the fact that we know from ancient
history and from contemporary experience and
lots of scientific experiments that dolphins simply
have a purely benign relationship with human beings.
They have no intention whatsoever to harm us,
to eat us or to abuse us in any way.
So given that, we're dealing with a creature that has
as I said this diagnostic ability to be able to see inside
to see what the actual condition of our living tissues
are, and they also have a therapeutic ability,
which is to send energy into our body.
They can do this with this ultrasonic system.
Now we don't know very much about this,
there's a great deal of research that needs to be done.
There are a lot of hypothesis about what's going on there.
I think the most likely hypothesis is that the ultrasonic
emissions of the dolphin have a way of simulating chemical
changes in the body.
If we are willing to go so far as to identify that the
human body has got an energy system within it
that is a matrix in which all of our cells are bound,
that that energy matrix, or that etheric body or that
energy, the bio field of the body, seems to be
very susceptible to dolphins.
Because I believe there is much more involved in
who the dolphins are then simply the biological creature.
We're dealing with a creature that has a self awareness
just as human beings are aware.
We are aware not only that we are having this experience
but we actually can observe ourselves
having this experience.
Talk about that.
And so the dolphin has that same degree of self awareness.
Let me stay on this healing thing.
What I see the dolphin doing is its able to perceive
many, many aspects of the human condition.
Not only physical issues but more than that.
Now the subject we're talking about here basically
is dolphin assistant therapy.
It's in in dolphin assistant therapy that a few very
far sighted people, very sensitive people have been
able to envision the possibility that the dolphin could
interact with people in a very careful,
a modality of therapeutic...
With a therap...
In a therapeutic practice.
With a therapist there working between as the
intermediary between the dolphin and the patient.
It's important to realize that dolphin assistant therapy
is not simply putting a person in the
presence of a dolphin.
Now who's to say in many cases I have seen where
people have gotten an extraordinary amount out of
their experience with a dolphin.
Sometimes even physical things that they have experienced.
But dolphin assistant therapy essentially is a human being
who has got a high degree of skill in a
therapeutic practice.
Be it craniosacral therapy, occupational therapy,
physical therapy, speech therapy, any of the main kinds of
good therapies that we have today;
to which is added a dolphin.
And the therapists needs to understand how that dolphin
can accelerate, can enhance, or contribute to
that therapeutic practice.
So if a child comes, for instance, with autism,
and the parents have reached their wits end.
This child has never intentionally looked them in the eye.
Has never expressed a word or a gesture of any kind
of it's own needs.
It simply exists in a very, very small and contained
world that seems quite insensitive to all
approaches from outside.
And they take this child with a therapist into the water.
Somehow, the dolphin seems to very, very universally
have this ability to almost, shall we say slide under
the radar.
This autistic child will suddenly start to pay attention.
This dolphin has approached them in a way that
nothing else has ever touched them,
and they experienced something.
Now of course we can't be in the mind of the
autistic child.
We don't know what it is that exactly that
touches them in this way.
But we see enormous response, incredible reponse,
particularly among the autistic community.
So what are we encountering there?
I would say not only are we seeing the physical ability
of the dolphin to stimulate the physical body of the child
but very likely this dolphin has got some access to the
consciousness and perhaps even to the soul of that child.
To welcome that child into life.
I have seen families entire history be changed
in a matter of weeks.
With dolphin assistant therapy, a child who did not
speak at all, within three weeks had about 30 sounds
that she could make, and about 20 little gestures.
Doesn't sound like much, but for a family that's been
struggling with a child for 11 years who has never once
ever intended to made any intentional communication,
to suddenly be expressing what she likes, what she
doesn't like;
this family in particular that I'm referring to, I have
kept track of.
And when I was writing my book I asked I,
wrote to the family and asked whether or not I could
publish a photograph that I had taken of their child.
And I asked them if they would ask her
whether it was okay.
And she responded, through the father, and said
yes I would like very much to have my photograph
published because I would like other children to know
what can happen.
Now this is a child, like I said who had never spoken.
So we see remarkable things occur and a
tremendous amount of credit must be given to the
human therapist.
We mustn't think of this as a silver bullet.
This is not just a magical process which is suddenly gonna
change anything.
The therapist must be very competent.
Sadly actually to my mind, there is very little
dolphin assistant therapy going on.
This story captured the human imagination
in the very early 1990s when several stories were published
they were widely distributed.
And this seems to have caught fire in the
human imagination.
Virtually everywhere I've been around the world and
I mean around the world.
I can be talking to the most average of person,
and I'll say something about dolphins and my work
with dolphins and usually within a minute or two they say
don't dolphins do something wonderful with
challenged children or children with autism,
down syndrome children?
Well the fact that there is so little of it going on
around the world and yet it is so prevalent in our
imagination, tells me something again about the importance
of our relationship with the dolphin.
The people who are doing the most significant,
the most beautiful and I would say the most,
reliably effective dolphin assistant therapy, are
in an organization in Florida which is called
Island Dolphin Care.
And you can find them, Island Dolphin Care dot com
through the internet.
The woman there named Deena Hoagland
and her husband Pete have been running this program
now for about 10 years.
We were just there just a couple of weeks ago,
and they had just had the grand opening of a
brand new three million dollar facility that they had built,
specifically for dolphin assistant therapy.
So they deal with special needs children from
around the world.
They've never raised their prices.
They're running a non profit organization there and the
results are absolutely stunning.
Where this is gonna go, I'm very happy to say
that there are now several facilities that are being
either remodeled because they are very, very
old facilities and one in fact is being built
from the ground up to do dolphin assistant therapy.
So we are looking toward a time when this is gonna be
much more prevalent.
Right now there are very few places where it's done.
Looking at that through perhaps the
opposite lens, I've also read studies
in the past where dolphins were utilized by the military
to be able to carry out more destructive missions
as it were.
Carrying explosives with them, etcetera.
Why do you think a dolphin could be coerced into
doing such a thing?
I've always wondered about that because they're so
they seem to have such an incredibly open heart
and strong desire to help us in whatever we request.
What's up with that?
Well there is that factor right there.
A dolphin is fascinated by human beings and human
activities and we must not let ourselves project onto
the dolphin our own ideas and our own
our own values really.
A dolphin wouldn't know that that package of things
that it's been asked to carry our there is explosives.
However, that being said, that U.S. Navy
attempted for quite a long time to enlist dolphins
as soldiers to do
very damaging things, I'll put it that way.
And the Navy still to this day denies
certain aspects of this story, but there are very
credible reports from people who did work in the
program, indicating that in fact dolphins were
enlisted to be soldiers.
Eventually the Navy stopped that whole aspect of their
work because they found the dolphins to be simply
incapable of determining the difference between an
enemy person and a friendly person.
(laughing)
There's no difference to a dolphin.
Quote backfired.
It backfired.
At one point the U.S. Navy, and this was about
10 years ago, made a big public statement it was widely
publicized that they were decommissioning
all their dolphins.
They were giving up on dolphins.
Dolphins just simply weren't amenable to this kind of work.
They were giving up entirely.
In fact they said that they'd much rather work with
seals because you could go to sort of snap your fingers
they seal would jump in the back of a pickup truck
and you can go where you wanna do.
Dolphins are a lot more difficult and
dolphins don't do what you ask them to do.
And I must say without going into any graphic details
that the military tried some very, very extreme measures
to try to get dolphins to do what they wanted them to do.
However, what happened as a result of the Iraq war
when six dolphins were taken to Iraq to help them
clear the harbor there.
Looking for mines and unexploded ordinates on the
bottom of the harbor.
They took six dolphins from their training facility
in San Diego and they have them outfitted
with video cameras.
This is what they've come to now.
They strap a video camera on the pectoral fin and the
dolphin will swim around and they've been instructed
to swim very slowly and in these sort of grip patterns.
So the technician can be watching through this video
camera and see what's on the bottom and then with a
mapping system they can tell where these things are
and they can go in a remove them.
And it was actually very successfully done that the
dolphins made a very real contribution to that.
One interesting story is that when they got there,
they put the six dolphins in the water after they've
been accumulated for a little while and they had
their little video camera strapped on them and they
were sort of told go, and one of them sort of turned
around and said well thanks for all the fish
I'm out of here and left.
I enjoy that part of the story I think that's wonderful
that the dolphin had enough independence of its
own mind that it just decided he wanted to go off and
wonder around and see what was there and
kind of on a holiday.
But there's another part of the story which is also
fascinating and that is that four days later Tahoma,
this dolphin returned.
Now this fits in with other stories that I know of
where dolphins have sought out human care.
They've actually come to human beings who were
running dolphin facilities and said please let me in.
After hurricane Andrew swept through the Florida keys
some years ago.
At one the dolphin facilities there actually had to
drop all of their fences and force all the dolphins
to leave, they had 17 dolphins.
Once they were able to get back down after the
alert had been called off, they went back down,
they were hoping of course the dolphins would reappear.
Well within a few days they had 22 dolphins.
So the dolphins had gone out and said hey you guys
come on back we got a
good place to be.
Free fish.
Yeah free fish.
Well let's talk about that a little bit
because that's certainly a controversial issue is
should we be domesticating these wild creatures?
Certainly I have mixed feelings on it, it seems as
though it's on one hand a wonderful thing and that
humans can have close-up interactions with them,
and this is one way to do it
On the other you wonder about their own sense of
joy and freedom.
So what is your take on it?
Well it is a very sensitive issue and it's one that I've
struggled with a lot over time.
I began from the point of view that all dolphins should
be free and that our interaction with them should only be
in the wild.
For me there was a real epiphany when I went to visit a
dolphin, she was the dolphin I first swam with.
I had such an extraordinary experience with her
that about six years later I went back to see her,
not telling the people who care for her that I was
there to try to find someway to get her free.
And they were very nice very generous with me
and they said well you can just go out and spend some
time sitting by the pool with dolphin.
This is during the rest period of the day when the
dolphins are not to be interacted with.
So I went out and sat beside the pool and I began
talking to this dolphin, her name is Squirt.
And I said to her look Squirt I'd really like to
know what I can do to get you out of here.
Have you got any ideas and how it is living here?
And she preceded to show me, and I can only say that
this was a subjective experience.
This was what I felt a kind a soul to
soul communication.
Almost telepathic
in a sense a deeper...
Well yes telepathy does
definitely play a role in who the dolphins are.
And that's a subject we can definitely talk about some more.
But I experienced with her over that next hour,
an incredibly clear, and distinct
mesage from her saying please don't even think about
letting me out of here.
I don't want to leave here.
My life is completely fulfilled here.
This is where I get to be, to do what my mission
in life is.
Every single day people bring me children who have
needs and I get to work with them, and I'm
working with a wonderful staff who love me,
who care for me, this is where I'm meant to be
don't even think about letting me out of here.
Now that was shocking to me.
It was not what I wanted to hear.
This is part of how we can learn to validate telepathic
transmission, or information that's coming from
outside yourself.
When it's something you don't want to hear,
that's when it may very well be the most true,
and most real.
So this changed my attitude dramatically,
and I knew in that instant, that this was going to
tremendously change my relationship with a lot of
my friends, who also held this very strong opinion that
dolphins should all be free which it did.
It did change my relationship with many friends.
Over the years I think many of them now have begun
to come to my view.
And that simply is that dolphins also have a
destiny in which they live, just as we do.
Each one of us has a life that has a purpose,
that is designed by something else, some great intelligence
that leads our lives, guides us.
And we can put that in the terms of the soul.
I believe that each of us as a human being is not
only a soul, but we are self aware souls.
And this is just an extraordinary thing.
I also say that the dolphins have not only very vital souls
but they are clearly aware of that.
They observe their own reality.
And so when we say that our soul has guided us to
live the life that we're living.
Perhaps to have chosen the parents that we were born through
to encounter certain learning in moments in our lives,
why can't we also extend that same understanding
to the dolphins.
So if a dolphin is born in captivity, and I
rarely use the word captivity.
I'm only using it for this particular purpose.
If a dolphin is born in a human managed facility,
what is the destiny of that dolphin?
It can never be returned to the ocean.
It can't be returned to a place it's never been.
It doesn't understand that.
Now it gets a little bit complex, but let me just follow
one track here.
Right now there are somewhere around 3,000 or
3,500 dolphins around the world that are living in
human managed facilities.
Of those let's say 3,000, probably over half
were born in facilities.
So let's just look at those half.
Those let's say 1,500 dolphins around the world,
if we're gonna treat them well.
If we're gonna give them proper care,
we must allow them to be in mixed society,
males and females together.
If you've got males and females together, you're
gonna have offspring.
So very simply mathematically we have a geometrically
exponentially, increasing population of dolphins who
have never been in the sea.
There are dolphins now that are six generations
away from the ocean.
You have to say this is another kind of dolphin.
This is a dolphin who's life is meant to be, if you will,
among human beings.
And this calls us out, as human beings this calls to us
a level of responsibility, that we have maybe never
completely shouldered.
How are we gonna care for these creatures?
If we're gonna recognize them for who they truly are,
are we gonna rise to that level of responsibility,
to give them all that they should have?
So, we've got that aspect.
We've got this ever increasing population of dolphins
who are born among humans.
We have another population of dolphins who have
been brought in from the wild.
As time goes by, there will be less and less
and less of those required, if you will, to provide
the interaction that there is a tremendous demand for.
Now I have looked very, very carefully at this whole
story of the acquisition of wild dolphins.
And I have to admit that there have been horrific stories
terrible stories.
Stories where quite a number of dolphins die just for
one to be able to survive.
That kind of story I'm happy to report is a thing
very much of the past.
People who go out to gather dolphins now, are
extremely sensitive and becausefor one thing, and I'd
hate to make it be this way but the simple economics
of dealing with dolphins and caring for them,
when it's a dolphin who just simply doesn't want to
be among human beings, it's way too expensive.
So what has happened as a result of the interest in
having wild dolphins brought into the facilities, is that
the people who were going out and gathering them
are extremely sensitive to whether or not this dolphin
is okay with being among human beings.
The ways that they are brought out of the ocean now
are much, much more gentle than ever before.
And I really mustn't say where this is happening
but there are several places in the world where,
villages have been developing relationships with dolphins
for many generations.
The dolphins come in in a very friendly way,
they interact with these people and what these people,
these are typically in third world countries where there's
very little income of any other kind;
these people develop a relationship with the dolphin
where they're feeding the dolphins.
The dolphins become quite accumulated to humans,
they become quite happy to be around human beings
and those dolphins are carefully sometimes selected
and taken to dolphin facilities.
So at no time is there any kind of a physical
forcing of a dolphin out of the ocean in that case.
And that's certainly not to say that there aren't
people who are
rapacious in their attitude.
Their certainly still are people out there who would
just go out and throw a lasso around a dolphin and
drag it on a boat and take it in some,
into some pool they've dug with a back hoe
and thrown some salt in the water and play with it
often and charge money for it.
The dolphin lives for a couple of months, dies
and they go out and get another one.
This is a horrible thing.
It's been happening in Central and South America now for
some time and it's a very real concern and I'm very
I have a lot of respect for people who are
struggling against that situation trying to stop it.
But let's keep in mind that right now there are
somewhere between two and three hundred thousand
people every year, who are seeking out the experience
of swimming with a dolphin.
Very few of them have the athletic ability,
the opportunity, the time
to go to the wild and take their chance that they
might have the opportunity to swim with the dolphin
in the wild.
And I also think that there's something a bit more
appropriate about not going out and leaping into
the living room of the wild dolphins and saying
come on let's play.
Many of those dolphins don't want to hang out
with human beings.
So we've gotta, it's a complex issue.
But I think with a just a half step back
we can look at this and we can say you know
we're starting to very appropriate in our care for them.
There is a tremendous demand.
The London Times and the Melbourne Australia
daily newspaper each did an interview of over
1,000 people and asked them what are the 10
top things that you would like to be sure you do
before you die?
And in both cases the number one response was
I want to swim with a dolphin
before I die.
That would've been
mine I've said the same thing, for years and years.
And why is that, this is part of my fascination;
what is it that is of such residence and of such importance?
What is it about the beauty, the embodiment
that the dolphin is that draws us in this inexorable way
toward this encounter?
There's something there for us.
On that note,
there are people around the planet,
often times movie stars and other elites that
that wear a little gold dolphin around their neck
and this has to do with where we started in this
interview, the legend of the Golden Dolphin.
Now if dolphin appears in pictographs and in
petroglyphs and everything else throughout history
around the globe, and the note said it was an
important part of our past on many levels,
where does that take us into the future from what
you know and I know the Golden Dolphin's a very
long story but in a nut shell?
Well the legend of the Golden Dolphin tells this
extraordinary story of the westward movement of the
influence of the dolphin spirit;
and how it has touched us as human beings.
You could say that the dolphins perhaps even help us
become human in the beginning.
Excuse me (coughs).
So the legend of the Golden Dolphin talks about these
cultural influences in different places.
In India the first incarnation of Vishnu,
one of the gods of Hinduism, the first incarnation;
the first of 10, the first incarnation was as a dolphin.
When we and there he supposedly brought the
civilizing arts to a barbaric mankind.
If you move westward and you come to Samaria
and the cradle of civilization, the earliest times
there you also have a tradition of these fish like
beings who came up out of the ocean to speak
to man to give them the civilizing arts.
And if you compare the list of what those civilizing
arts they're exactly the same.
In Egypt you have this mysterious story of Osiris
who was a god of the waters who lived in water,
who had glistening skin and taught people about
life and the nature of life.
And cultures all throughout Africa.
You come to the story of Greece, the entire story
of Greece was enlightened by the spirit of the Dolphin.
It came through Apollo in the oracle of Delphi.
The oracle Delphi was the place where the voice of Apollo
was heard in his form of a dolphin.
And it was from there that the Apollo temples
were built in all the cities of Greece
as it expanded around the Mediterranean.
The temple of Apollo was where law was dispensed,
was were people would go for
answers to life's deepest questions.
This all came through the spirit of the Dolphin.
And it was there in Greece that the idea of
democracy was born.
And it was born out of this dolphin story.
Because the dolphins always, throughout time and
in every culture, have brought people to that very thing
we've been talking about, about self reflection.
When you encounter the dolphin, you look into the
eye of a dolphin, you realize there's somebody
there looking back at you.
Different from a dolphin, excuse me,
different than a dog, different than a wolf,
different than an elephant even.
A dolphin has a presence that it's clearly
intelligent which looks back at you.
And so you have this experience of reflection.
Someone's looking at me, I'm looking at someone.
Suddenly that observer state comes into play.
So it was in recognition of the self and the
divinity, the god self that lies within us, the awaken soul.
This is the beginning in Greece of this whole
idea of democracy.
That it is not appropriate for a few human beings
to run all of the rest of humanity for their own purposes
but in fact the voice of everyone combined together
should be what guides us.
And this is still something we're struggling with.
Still something we're attempting to bring out,
and bring into manifestation.
There have been wonderful experiments,
the American experiment being one.
We've come now to a time where we're having to
look at it and say, wait a minute,
is this democracy we're experiencing here or is this
something else?
So this, the influence of the dolphins throughout time
up into Greece was extraordinary.
We can see it in mythology, we can see this
these elements now that have entered into
things that we have experienced today.
Coming forward through time we see the
entire era of wailing, which was a 600 year period
when humanity was lifted up to an entirely
new level of functioning through the products that
were made from the bodies of whales.
It seems an enormous statement but,
virtually all of the great port cities of the world
were developed around whaling.
The products of the body of the whale were everywhere.
Just as today we live in what you might call a
petrochemical culture around the world.
Everything is being supported and made and fueled
lubricated by petroleum, but that's only that's a
recent history.
That began in 1858.
That's the first time a well was ever drilled in the earth,
intentionally to draw oil out to use it for things.
For 600 years prior to that it'll have been the bodies
of whales and dolphins that have provided us with
virtually the same kinds of products.
So there was an influence there.
Now we can say wait a minute, that was just human beings
just taking something...
Exploiting.
I have a bit of a different take on that.
But let's keep on moving up until now.
We now have today, something we call
the environment movement.
This is something which has had a tremendous effect,
not only in America, not only in the developed countries
but even in the, so to speak, undeveloped countries
around the world.
The idea of becoming sensitive to the world in
which we live.
Well what is the history of that movement?
I would say arguably the beginnings of Green Peace,
as an organization was what really first brought it
to the attention of people around the world.
And what was it that Green Peace first did?
They went out and tried to stop whaling.
They put themselves literally in small rubber boats
between a Russian whaling fleet, and some whales.
Maybe this will start to bring up an image in your mind.
You probably remember this.
And when that happened, people sat up and said
wait a minute, there are human beings, right now
willing to risk their own lives to save a whale?
What's that about?
Well this begin to capture people's imagination,
it took us outside of the superior importance of
the human being.
We begin to see that something else was important.
This is now evolved into our recycling campaigns,
and our attempts to preserve and protect lands,
the cleaning up of rivers;
all of these kinds of sensitive issues that we have now.
So can we say that the whales had an influence in that?
I think very directly.
And even today, whales and dolphins could be seen as
sort of the canary in the coal mine.
You know the old story of the miners who would take
a canary down and watch the canary.
If the canary died in the cage, they knew there were
poisonous gases in the mine they had to get out of there.
Speaking of beaching etcetera,
as well?
Exactly.
So we've got these issues now of enormous numbers of
dolphins and whales being literally driven out of the
ocean by the sounds that are being poured into the ocean.
We as humans don't know this directly, but the
oceans are suffering from extraordinary
sonic pollution these days.
And some of it is being directed in ways which,
absolutely does not need to be happening;
and it is terribly destructive to the whales and
dolphins who live in a primarily sonic environment.
And beyond that we've got runoff issues where
you got habitat destruction which is killing fish,
it's killing reefs, and thereby affecting the
whales and dolphins.
Let me point our another little piece of
what the affect of our relationship with whales and
dolphins has had.
In ancient traditions they talk about the whales
being the creators of the breath of the planet
and the keepers of the breath of the planet.
A very nice and a poetic idea.
You see the great plumes coming out of them as they
rise to surface and you think, oh okay that's where
their idea came from.
But let's take a moment and look at where
does most of the planets oxygen come from.
Now many of us think that the oxygen primarily comes
from the rain forest and the trees of the planet,
not true.
About one third of the world's oxygen comes from there.
The larger portion comes from what's called phytoplankton.
And phytoplankton are tiny, tiny little plants that
bloom in the oceans.
Okay phytoplankton grows in literally trillions of
tons, most of it south of the equator.
And when this stuff blooms, it gives off oxygen
into the air.
What feeds upon phytoplankton are called krill,
and krill are tiny little shrimp like creatures.
The krill eat the phytoplankton and help keep the
phytoplankton in a kind of balance so that it can bloom
again and its whole reproduction cycle.
The krill is the food of the great whales.
In the southern oceans, human beings have removed
up to 96 percent of those great whales.
So what happens then when you take the farmer
out of the farm?
If the southern oceans and the phytoplankton blooms
are so to speak the oxygen farm of the planet,
and you disturb that cycle, profoundly
you will have affected the global atmosphere.
As a matter of fact, what happens, the phytoplankton
will bloom in enormous amounts,
the krill have not been eaten and
gone through their cycle necessarily because the whales are
missing, so the whole thing starts to get completely
out of balance.
There'll be enormous phytoplankton blooms without
enough krill to eat it.
What happens then is the phytoplankton begins to
rot on the surface, it exhausts methane gas which
goes into the atmosphere and it thins the ozone layer.
Plus it adds to other atmosphere conditions.
So part of what we're seeing in terms of global warming
is a direct result of our having taken so many whales
out of the system.
We're moving the farmer from the oxygen farm.
Now they have, because whales and dolphins have been
doing what they do on the planet for 30 million years.
About 50 million years ago is when they made their
apparently conscious choice.
The legend of the Golden Dolphin said it was a
conscious choice, to move back into the oceans.
They went through a long evolutionary period,
but for 30 million years, they've been doing just what
they're doing now.
In 30 million years they've figured out how to manange
things, how to take care of things.
So this is one area, where they've been managing
the oxygen source of the planet.
Are they the keepers of the breath of the planet?
Well obviously they are.
So the effect that we have is not only mythological,
and a spiritual, and even an emotional and physical
effect in terms of the healing that they offer us,
but there are also an incredibly and integral part
in the whole living system of the planet.
This is not an emotional issue, which the
Japanese and the Norwegians are attempting
to make that argument.
In their attempt to retain their supposedly traditional
rights to harvest the whales, they say all the rest
of the cultures of the world, they're just emotionally
caught up in these animals.
Why should we pay any attention to that?
We have other needs.
Well as a matter of fact it's not an emotional issue
primarily, it's an issue of global survival.
As the founder of the Citations Study Institute
what do you intend to do about this next?
Where does your road go?
Well the latest form that my work has taken is called
the Dolphin Embassy.
This is an idea that was first come up with some years
ago by some people in Australia.
The two primary people who have developed that idea
have since died and it was quite extraordinary for
me to realize that the day that I went to the Australian
registry office to register a non profit organization
called the Dolphin Embassy was in fact the very day
that the final person died who had originated the
idea, I found this out later.
This is a mission, so to speak, to help remind
people of the importance of the dolphin and the
whale in our history.
Part of the work includes the fact that in the 1980s
it was a tremendous upsurge in our awareness
of dolphins, suddenly they became quite popular.
Begin seeing the kind of artifacts and artwork you saw.
You saw lots of stories being written and films being made.
So in a sense that was like a gift that was given to us
that we said ah this is beautiful, we paid attention to
it for a while then we put it on the shelf;
and said well what other gifts are out there
because many gifts are being opened up right now?
And this is one that has perhaps been put aside for
a little bit too long.
We need to remember that we share this planet with
extraordinary beings who have so much to offer us.
We could call them the successful life forms
this planet has ever produced.
No dolphin has a hard time figuring out how to
be a dolphin.
But how many human beings, are struggling with the
issue of how to be a human?
How to be successful, how to be sustainable,
how to be loving and kind and full of the celebratory
joy of life?
And when we wanna see a model of that, we need
only look to the dolphins.
If we look beyond this world,
if we look to the ET's, the ascended masters, the angels
and ask for them to come and to help us in our lives,
they may or may not come.
In the meantime while you're waiting, you can
always go down to the shore and commune with a dolphin.
You can simply watch them.
You don't need to swim with them, you don't need
to touch them, you don't need to be in a swim
program somewhere and maybe dissapointed by the
the process that the trainers are asking you to go through.
You can contemplate the dolphin.
And in doing so you will contact that spirit.
So if we recognize that the earth is not really
properly called earth.
We should probably call this Oceania because
more than two thirds of the planet is covered
with the ocean as you said.
Well who are the enlightened citizens of that nation?
The whales and dolphins.
So we could that the citation nation.
So the Dolphin Embassy then is our work to
bring to awareness among human beings
as much as possible, that we share this earth
with an enlightened, extraordinary kind of creature,
who has gifts for us now, and has always given us
everything that we've needed, the be the human
beings that we really want to be.
So if your journey and your story is written into
the greater legend of the Golden Dolphin,
what is next or
where are we headed with that again
and just in brief where are we headed with that?
Well ideally we will see dolphin assisted therapy
expand tremendously.
The field of inter species communication still has
tremendous promise.
And we've just found some people in Florida just a
few weeks ago who appear to be making an
extraordinary breakthrough into new understandings
of what the dolphins are actually saying.
They've got an organization called speak dolphin dot com.
And by all means go and visit their website and take
a look at what they're doing.
They're using the latest technology, things that have only
been released in the last six months to be able to look
at dolphins sounds in such high resolutions;
that we're beginning to discover that what we thought
were simple and intense sounds are in fact
enormous songs.
Every little burst of sound a dolphin makes is an
entire stack of chords of sound.
And we've only been able with high technology
to begin to look at what that means.
We believe that there is language there.
We believe that there are effects that with it our
being created by the dolphins are encoded by that language.
So inter species communication is another area we're
gonna go, I think in a very exciting way in the
next few years.
The legend of the Golden Dolphin and the work of
John Lilly, together suggests that there can be
and should be, and I'm very much in favor of this,
a children's movement.
And that children's movement would ask the
community of nations to declare peace between
the people of the land and the people of the sea.
And I mean the people of the sea.
So I have had a vision in my mind I've been very
fond of, of bringing together and providing opportunity
for children around the world to represent what it is
their dream of a future world would be like.
I would love to see them come together under the
banner and the sponsorship of the Citation Nation.
And I have this picture of a wave of children walking
across the plaza in front of the United Nations building
and a young boy and young girl each carrying a scroll.
And have them walk up to the front door of the
United Nations and knock on the door and an adult comes
and opens the door and these two children present this
scroll, on which is written the dream of the children of the
world for the world they would like to see.
Thank you.
(soft music)
For the full story on Scott's journey with dolphins
and whales you might also want to pick up a copy
of his book, Souls of the Sea:
Dolphins, Whales, and Human Destiny.
Until next time, thanks for watching.
(soft music)